## Configure your Ruby on Rails application

### Mandatory configuration

Be sure that:

* you push to the **master branch**
* you commit your `gems.locked` or `Gemfile.lock` file
* you have a `config.ru` file (this one is most of the time generated by rails)
* you have `gem puma` in your `Gemfile` (`puma` is the default application server from rails, when creating a new ruby application, an [environment variable](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud) is automatically added: `CC_RACKUP_SERVER=puma`)

You need to provide a `gems.locked` or `Gemfile.lock` file. To do that ensure you have at least once run `bundle install` in your terminal at the root of your rails project.

### Choose ruby version

If you specify a ruby version in your `gems.rb` of `Gemfile`, we'll use it, otherwise; keep reading.

On your Clever Cloud application create an [environment variable](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud) `CC_RUBY_VERSION=rubyversion` where `rubyversion` represents:

* "3" will select the greatest "3.X.Y" version available.
* "3.3" will select the greatest "3.3.Y" version available.
* "3.3.1" will select the "3.3.1" version.

Due to current landscape in ruby applications, the default version is the greatest 3.3.Y. We also provide versions 2.3.Y, 2.4.Y, 2.5.Y, 2.6.Y and 2.7.Y.

If given `rubyversion` does not match any available version, your deployment will fail.

### Choose your environment

You can set the `RUBY_ENV` [environment variable](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud) to the value you want. By default it is set to `production`.
Most used values are `production` and `development` but you can use any custom one as long as you have set up of the required variables for this environment in your `./config/` folder files.

### Secure configuration of secret key

There are many way to add secret key to your environment and each one is valid. Clever Cloud provides you a secure way so you don't have to commit any file containing it.

1. generate the secret key locally with `rake secret`
2. add it to your environment in `./config/secret.yml` with:

  ```yaml
  production:
      secret_key_base: <%= ENV["SECRET_KEY_BASE"] %>
  ```

### Configure Rake goals

You can specify a list of rake goals to execute before the deployment of your application by using the `CC_RAKEGOALS` environment variable.

The value of this variable must be a comma-separated list of goals, for instance:

```bash
CC_RAKEGOALS="db:migrate, assets:precompile"
```

We do not execute any rake goals by default.

### Configure Sidekiq

To run a Sidekiq process in background you will need to enable it with the `CC_ENABLE_SIDEKIQ=true` environment variable.

Please note you will need a Redis instance to use this feature.

You can specify multiple Sidekiq configuration files with the `CC_SIDEKIQ_FILES` environment variable.

The value of this variable must be a comma-separated list of files:

```bash
CC_SIDEKIQ_FILES="./config/sidekiq_1.yml,./config/sidekiq_2.yml,./config/sidekiq_3.yml"
```

**Note:** `CC_SIDEKIQ_FILES` have precedence over `CC_ENABLE_SIDEKIQ` which means that even if `CC_SIDEKIQ_FILES` is defined and `CC_ENABLE_SIDEKIQ` is set to `false`, Sidekiq will still be enabled.

Each path is the path *from the root of the repository* to a sidekiq configuration file.

Each file might contain something like this standard sidekiq.yml file:

```yaml
---
:concurrency: 4
:pidfile:     tmp/pids/sidekiq_1.pid
:queues:
  - [critical, 2]
  - default

production:
  :logfile: ./log/sidekiq.log
---
```

### Manage your static files and assets

Static files are configured with [environment variables](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud):

`STATIC_FILES_PATH`: should point to a directory where your static files are stored.

`STATIC_URL_PREFIX`: the URL path under which you want to serve static files (for example `/public/`)

**Note**: the path of your folder must be absolute regarding the root of your application.

**Note**: setting the `STATIC_URL_PREFIX` to `/` will make the deployment to fail.

If you use the asset pipeline, make sure to include the `assets:precompile` task in the `CC_RAKEGOALS` environment variable value.

```bash
CC_RAKEGOALS="db:migrate, assets:precompile"
```

**Note**: if your project uses `webpacker`, make sure to enable the dedicated build instance option in the **Information** menu of your application in the Clever Cloud console because `webpacker` needs a lot a resources when starting.

### Using Active Storage and Cellar S3

Only for Rails >= 5.2.

* Enable Active Storage for your application: `$ rails active_storage:install` then `$ rake db:migrate`
* Add `gem "aws-sdk-s3", require: false` to your Gemfile, run `$ bundle install`
* Add `config.active_storage.service = :clevercloud` in `config/environments/production.yml`
* Add in `config/storage.yml`:

  ```yaml
  clevercloud:
    service: S3
    access_key_id: <%= ENV['CELLAR_ADDON_KEY_ID'] %>
    secret_access_key: <%= ENV['CELLAR_ADDON_KEY_SECRET'] %>
    region: us-east-1
    bucket: <%= ENV['CELLAR_ADDON_BUCKET_NAME'] %>
    endpoint: <%= ENV['CELLAR_ADDON_ENDPOINT'] %>
    force_path_style: true
  ```

* In the clever cloud console create a Cellar S3 storage add-on, name it, link it to your rails application and create a bucket.
* In the environment variables section of your Ruby on Rails application on Clever Cloud add the following environment variables:

  ```bash
  CELLAR_ADDON_BUCKET_NAME="<your bucket name>"
  CELLAR_ADDON_ENDPOINT="https://cellar-c2.services.clever-cloud.com"
  ```

You can now commit and push your changes.

Also, you are able to use a Filesystem Bucket to store your static files. Please refer to the
[File System Buckets](/developers/doc/addons/fs-bucket) section.

### NGINX configuration

NGINX settings can be configured with [environment variables](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud):

* `NGINX_READ_TIMEOUT`: the response timeout in seconds. (Default: 300)

#### Basic authentication

If you need basic authentication, you can enable it using [environment variables](/developers/doc/reference/reference-environment-variables/#ruby). You will need to set `CC_HTTP_BASIC_AUTH` variable to your own `login:password` pair. If you need to allow access to multiple users, you can create additional environment `CC_HTTP_BASIC_AUTH_n` (where `n` is a number) variables.

#### NGINX optional configuration with `clevercloud/http.json`

NGINX settings can be configured further in `clevercloud/http.json`. All its fields are optional.

* `languages`: configure a default language and redirections
* `error_pages`: configure custom files for error pages
* `force_https`: automatically redirect HTTP traffic to HTTPS
* `aliases`: set up redirections
* `charset`: force a specific charset

```json
{
    "languages": {
        "default": {"rewrite": "en"},
        "fr": {"rewrite": "en"}
    },
    "error_pages": {
        "404": "path/to/page"
    },
    "force_https": true,
    "aliases": {
        "/path": "redirection"
    },
    "charset": "latin-1"
}
```

### Puma configuration

Puma reads its configuration from the `config/puma.rb` file. See [the puma documentation](https://GitHub.com/puma/puma/blob/master/README.md) for more information.

You can override this configuration with [environment variables](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud).
Each of them, when specified, will be preferred over the setting from `config/puma.rb`.

* `CC_PUMA_WORKERS` overrides the number of workers (for example, `CC_PUMA_WORKERS=2`)
* `CC_PUMA_THREADS` overrides the number of threads per worker, can be a raw number or a range (for example, `CC_PUMA_THREADS=6` or `CC_PUMA_THREADS=4:8`)

If they are not defined in the environment nor in `config/puma.rb` we will setup the values depending on the size of the scaler your application is running on.
We also fill the `WEB_CONCURRENCY` and `RAILS_MAX_THREADS` environment variable if they are not present as they may be used by rails' puma configuration.

## Overriding rackup application server

You can override the puma default server by setting an [environment variable](#setting-up-environment-variables-on-clever-cloud) `CC_RACKUP_SERVER=yourserver`. We do not recommend you do it.
